FOURTH SECTION

DECISION

Application no. 8209/04
Teodor MARINICĂ and Others
against Romania

The European Court of Human Rights (Fourth Section), sitting on 26 September 2017 as a Committee composed of:

Paulo Pinto de Albuquerque, President,
Egidijus Kūris,
Iulia Motoc, judges,

and Andrea Tamietti, Deputy Section Registrar,

Having regard to the above application lodged on 12 December 2003,

Having deliberated, decides as follows:

FACTS AND PROCEDURE

1. A list of the applicants is set out in the appendix.

2. The applicants’ complaints concerning Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention were communicated to the Romanian Government (“the Government”), who were represented by their Agent, Ms C. Brumar, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

3. On 15 July 2009 the applicants asked the Court to suspend its proceedings in relation to the present case, in view of the existence before the domestic authorities of proceedings capable, in the applicants’ view, to offer them redress for the alleged breach.

4. On respectively 15 October 2015 and 8 June 2016 the applicants were invited to indicate whether they wished to pursue their application, in view of the fact that no further information had been provided to the Court in relation to the above-mentioned domestic proceedings. Their attention was drawn to Article 37 § 1 (a) of the Convention. The letters, sent by registered post, were left unclaimed by the applicants.

THE LAW

5. The Court considers that, in these circumstances, the applicants may be regarded as no longer wishing to pursue their application, within the meaning of Article 37 § 1 (a) of the Convention. Furthermore, in accordance with Article 37 § 1 in fine , the Court finds no special circumstances regarding respect for human rights as defined in the Convention and its Protocols which require the continued examination of the case.

In view of the above, it is appropriate to strike the case out of the list.

For these reasons, the Court, unanimously,

Decides to strike the application out of its list of cases.

Done in English and notified in writing on 19 October 2017.

Andrea Tamietti Paulo Pinto de Albuquerque
Deputy Registrar President

Appendix
List of applicants

Teodor MARINICĂ is a Romanian national who was born in 1930 and lives in Bucharest.

Anca Irinel CATRINA is a Romanian national who was born in 1971 and lives in Bucharest.

Octavian Mihai MARINICĂ is a Romanian national who was born in 1970 and lives in Bucharest.