SECOND SECTION

DECISION

Application no. 48103/07
by György DIANOVSZKI
against Hungary

The European Court of Human Rights (Second Section), sitting on 18 October 2011 as a Committee composed of:

Dragoljub Popović, President,
András Sajó,
Paulo Pinto de Albuquerque, judges,
and Françoise Elens-Passos, Deputy Section Registrar,

Having regard to the above application lodged on 30 October 2007,

Having regard to the formal declarations accepting a friendly settlement of the case,

Having deliberated, decides as follows:

PROCEDURE

The applicant, Mr György Dianovszki, was a Hungarian national born in 1948 who lived in Pákozd. He died on 20 April 2010. Mr and Mrs Imre Ambrus are his heirs. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr L. Höltzl, Agent, Ministry of Public Administration and Justice.

The applicant complained under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention about the length of civil proceedings to which he was a party.

On 27 and 31 July 2011 the Court received friendly settlement declarations signed by the parties under which the applicant’s heirs agreed to waive any further claims against Hungary in respect of the facts giving rise to this application against an undertaking by the Government to pay them jointly EUR 2,400 (two thousand four hundred euros) to cover any pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage as well as costs and expenses, which would be converted into Hungarian forints at the rate applicable on the date of payment, and will be free of any taxes that may be applicable. This amount will be payable within three months from the date of notification of the decision taken by the Court pursuant to Article 37 § 1 of the Convention. In the event of failure to pay this sum within the said three-month period, the Government undertook to pay simple interest on it, from expiry of that period until settlement, at a rate equal to the marginal lending rate of the European Central Bank during the default period plus three percentage points. The payment will constitute the final resolution of the case.

THE LAW

The Court takes note of the friendly settlement reached between the parties. It is satisfied that the settlement is based on respect for human rights as defined in the Convention and its Protocols and finds no reason to justify a continued examination of the application (Article 37 § 1 in fine of the Convention).

In view of the above, it is appropriate to strike the case out of the list.

For these reasons, the Court unanimously

Decides to strike the application out of its list of cases.

Françoise Elens-Passos Dragoljub Popović
Deputy Registrar President